The Federal Government has promised to assist potential Qatari investors with comprehensive mineral data on the nation’s abundant lithium deposit.

The Minister of Solid Minerals Development, Oladele Alake, gave the assurance during a meeting with Qatari businessmen on the sidelines of the visit of President Bola Tinubu to Qatar on Saturday.

According to a statement by the Special Adviser to Minister, Kehinde Bamigbetan, the necessary data available at the Nigerian Geological Survey Agency would assist the establishment of lithium companies.

Alake said, “Comprehensive data on the pattern and quantity of energy mineral Lithium are available at the Nigerian Geological Survey Agency for businesses interested in establishing lithium companies in Nigeria.”

Responding to inquiries on the quality of Nigerian lithium by Qatari business mogul, Sheikh Shahid Jawad, Alake said mineral exploration initiated by the Federal Government has identified locations where lithium occurs in commercial quantities and high grades.

Alake recalled that on a visit to Australia, he was presented with samples of rock composites from Nigeria with high-grade lithium content confirmed by laboratory analysis.

He said it showed that the quality of Nigerian lithium has been recognised by the global mining sector.
 
Encouraging Qatari businessmen to visit the country and witness the immense opportunities in mining, Alake said the Nigerian government has put in place generous, investor-friendly policies to facilitate business.

Also speaking at the event, the Executive Secretary of Solid Minerals Development Fund, Mrs Fatimah Shinkafi urged investors to explore opportunities in mining infrastructures.

Shinkafi said while the government will continue to provide transportation facilities to the Mines, mining companies that recognise the significance of transportation to their future cost control will invest wisely by supplementing the government’s efforts.

Other businessmen at the top-level meeting included the Chief Executive Officer, ETCC Qatar
Sheikh El Jouneid and Aminu Dahiru, chairman, Asdub Oil & Gas.

Qatar is the third Gulf state Tinubu has visited since assuming the Presidency nine months ago.

Recall that the visit to the Arab country was embroiled in controversy after Qatar in a letter rejected the business forum trip stating that there was no agreement signed between the state of Qatar and the Federal Republic of Nigeria on investment and promotion.

However, a statement by Tinubu’s Special Adviser on Media and Publicity, Ajuri Ngelale said the president was invited to visit the country and participate in a business and investment forum.