The Yoruba nation activist, Sunday Adeyemo, fondly called Sunday Igboho, on Friday, expressed his readiness to tackle banditry and other criminal elements in the South West if he gets the support of traditional rulers, security agencies and other stakeholders.

Adeyemo, in a statement he personally signed and made available to PUNCH Online in Ibadan, Oyo State capital, said he was ready to collaborate with them in ensuring permanent peace in the region.

Reacting to the overtures by some of the traditional rulers, namely the Ooni of Ife, Oba Enitan Ogunwusi and Owa Ajero of Ijero Ekiti, Oba Joseph Adewole, seeking his (Adeyemo) involvement in getting rid of hoodlums in the region, Adeyemo said he was ready to assist in ensuring the safety and effective security of lives and property.

The PUNCH reports that the duo of Oba Ogunwusi and Adewolu, had during a security summit in Ile-Ife, Osun State, on Thursday, suggested the need to involve Adeyemo in tackling growing insecurity in Yorubaland.

While the meeting was on, the Yoruba nation activist was contacted via zoom to share his views on measures to address threats posed by insecurity occasioned by banditry, killer herdsmen and kidnapping, which have been ravaging the South West.

Adeyemo said, “I welcome the idea, and assure them that I will do my best to checkmate incidence of insecurity provided I receive the backing of the relevant security agencies, Yoruba monarchs and other stakeholders.

“We need the active involvement of all stakeholders in restoring peace and tranquility in all parts of the South West, most especially our agrarian communities. I am absolutely ready to contribute my quota in this regard if we secure the approval of the security agencies and the traditional institution in the South West.

“Insecurity and threats precipitated by banditry, herders/farmers clashes, leading to deaths and massive destruction of farmlands have driven away farmers and agric entrepreneurs from farm settlements in Yorubaland. Our fathers and other agile men can no longer engage in cultivation of land for food production.

“If there is peace in our communities, confidence of our farmers will be restored and enabling ambience will be provided for farming activities. We can do it and this will go a long way in addressing food shortage and inflation in the prices of foodstuffs. We must not shy away from any measure capable of securing our environment in order to boost socioeconomic growth.

“We need to flush out criminal elements, who have occupied our forests using the place as launch pads to jeopardize the peace in our communities, towns, villages and amulets. I am ready to lend my support in this regard,.”

