The Ebonyi State Police Command has fixed dates and venues for the JAMB administered Computer Based Test (CBT) for the General Duty applicants in the ongoing recruitment of Police Constables.

The Command said the CBT will take place on Tuesday, March 5, and Wednesday, March 6, 2024.

A statement issued by acting spokesman, DSP Joshua Ukandu in Abakaliki on Saturday, said the centers for the CBT exercise included Codefest International Academy CBT Centre, Block A, Silicon Valley Complex, New Government Secretariat Centenary City, Abakaliki and Fountain of Knowledge International Academy CBT Centre, and 49B Nteje Street, opposite Speedway filing station, Abakaliki.

“Candidates initially scheduled to write the test at the Comprehensive School of Management and Applied Technology, Watchman Street Abakaliki should note that the centre has been changed to Fountain of Knowledge International Academy CBT Centre, 49B Nteje Street, opposite Speedway filing station, Abakaliki.

“Applicants should check their application status, as well as the exact date and time for their Computer Based Test (CBT), by logging onto the recruitment website at apply.policerecruitment.gov.ng.

“Additionally, those who have received an invitation must arrive at their assigned CBT centres dressed in a white T-shirt, shorts, and canvas.

“They must also bring the CBT printout slip obtained from the recruitment website and any other required documents listed on the online registration platform.

“Please be aware that the Computer Based Test (CBT) is exclusively for those applying to General Duty roles. The Recruitment Board will announce the schedule and location for the practical test for Specialist cadre applicants in due course,” the statement said.

The Acting PPRO, said the Commissioner of Police, CP Augustina Ogbodo had wished Shortlisted General Duty candidates success in the CBT stage of the recruitment exercise, urging them to behave properly and avoid any kind of cheating during the examination.

“The Commissioner also warned them to be vigilant against employment fraudsters who might attempt to swindle them by offering to secure the job for a fee, emphasizing that the recruitment process is completely free of charge.”