President Bola Tinubu has said that Nigeria’s survival depends largely on Human Capital Development.

Speaking through the Minister of Education, Mamman Tahir at the 38th Convocation of the Bayero University, Kano, BUK, the President insisted that his administration will focus on skills, technology and vocational education as core drivers of an educational system that will prepare graduates for employment, and also to become employers of labour.

He said, “This administration will continue to support education because of our strong believe that our survival can only be assured by the quality of our Human Capital Development.

“This is why we made education top priority of our administration.”

According to the President, the Federal Government is building 24 skill and vocational hubs in polytechnics as well as entrepreneurship centres in the universities.

“We are also reviving 970 Islamic Tsangaya Centres for integrated leaning and development of Almagirai system in the country.

“We are also building 91 vocational schools in the secondary schools across the country to ensure that all levels of education enjoying the impact of our policy.

“We are set to inaugurate Private Sector Innovation Enterprise Centres across the country to deliver on the skill acquisition program of the government.

“Our universities are Centres of Learning, which needs to upscale and adjust to the modern day world by repositioning themselves as citadel of education that will bring about development,” Tinubu added.

The President further noted that his administration is determined to continue supporting the upgrade of infrastructure and research equipment in the universities.

Speaking further, be said, “Universities are therefore expected to define their roles and carve out a niche for themselves by designing programs that will assist government in poverty reduction, creating employment opportunities, health promotion, application of new technologies in the advancement of knowledge and prosperity, protecting the environment, promoting sustainable development as well as sustaining democracy and good governance.”